---
layout: post
title: "A subtle journey into data science"
tags:
- Journey
- Thoughts
---

Undoubtedly, Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning is commanding the decisive technological advancement in each sector around the globe. The emerging market of digital tools captivates the moderation of complex data into helpful information to optimize the industries influencing the modern social trends of living. Besides, the art of utilizing the programming languages for implementing scalable systems and using AI/ML to seek the foreseeable future and make decisions is ultimately digitalizing work and providing value to knowledge workers. As a Software Engineer in the internet industry, I noticed that the analytical aspect of capturing insights from big data, democratizing AI/ML, and making it accessible to everyone benefits everyone long term. I'm glad I decided to curve my career path and align my objective with learning in the most demanding and technologically advanced era. 

Since adolescence, I have admired automation, software, and resources, which provide a better knack for multiple tasks. My curiosity resides in attaining an in-depth vision of data science to pursue a professional career. My professional education elaborated on my career ambitions, allowing me to observe the vast spectrum of computer engineering and digital system analytics. Using quantitative analysis, analytical methods, and discrete mathematics to sort out complex data into useful holds my precise concentration for solving real-world problems. Further, my research experience in human-computer interaction helped me broaden my career prospects. I focused on the emerging aspects of technological interfaces between computers and humans and how they are designed and implemented. Looking ahead, I anticipate the need for advances in general intelligence and technologies that will advance the operationalization and democratization of machine learning. I have also recognized the need to enhance my knowledge, skills, and expertise in the relevant field throughout my academic and professional careers. I'm thankful for my journey and the associations I've made so far. It's time to build for impact at scale. 