---
layout: post
title: "Data Science, Politics, and the Society"
tags:
- Data Science
- Thoughts
---

The emerging field of data science, which involves extracting and using information from large amounts of unstructured data, falls into the realm of 'politicized' science. The large amounts of data used for analysis include user-generated data from social media, e-mails, videos, blogs, and activity tracking from websites – to name a few. Apparently, with domain expertise and statistics, experts and hackers tend to use a lot of user-generated data without proper consent, which has ignited many debates and controversies in society and made its way into the political sphere. Online e-commerce websites, for instance, are tracking users' clicks and activities to improvise their service and drive more traffic. On the other end, politicians are making use of big data to their advantage in political campaigns. For instance, Obama and his team used big data analytics to drive the 2012 presidential election and get people to vote. Hence, data science directly or indirectly intersects with the political sphere and is becoming a debatable subject or rather a more political issue.

Data science plays a role in several social contexts. As increasing organizations dabble with Big Data, the global economy is most likely to be affected, which in turn will affect society. According to a McKinsey report, data science and Big Data innovation can potentially add $300 billion in value per annum to US health care and increase consumer surplus by $600 billion (Source: datafloq.com). These advancements are likely to boost the economy and improve consumer sales. Negative aspects of these developments include the breach of consumer privacy and security concerns. Consumers will always feel like someone is watching and tracking them while they shop online or update on social media. Twitter, for instance, sold a tweet archive to a broker; Path – a photo sharing and messaging service – confessed that they used user data without permission. People favor strict legislation and regulations in that sector because of the inevitable misuse of Big Data. In the world of biomedical research, big data plays an important role as well, where researchers, funders, and health care providers are requesting an international alliance to share genomic data to improve clinical care and address global issues. Thus, data science is becoming increasingly relevant in a variety of social contexts, including business and health care.

Data science has become 'politicized' for various reasons related to certain aspects of modern science. Understanding these reasons is crucial. Firstly, with increasing research and development in the field, data scientists are formulating complex ways to handle and process Big Data for numerous valuable applications. On the other hand, as the area grows, various resources and software such as Apache Spark and data processing engines make the work of data scientists easier and simpler. Secondly, data science uses theories and information from several fields, including mathematics, nanotechnology, robotics, computer programming, information technology and approach, machine learning, etc. Research in health care, business, bioinformatics, and other sectors is influenced by data science. It is at this intersection that data science meets these disciplines. Thirdly, like all modern sciences, data science has seen faster bedside transitions in direct applications of the processed big data, which can drive important conclusions about real-world problems. For example, Google uses Instagram food posts to count calories using its complex algorithm and extensive data expertise. In other words, with existing resources, the Big Data is already there, and the increasing knowledge in processing this data and carving it the way one wants leads to a faster transition to real-world application. Last but not least, data science has many ethical, social, and legal ramifications which shouldn't be ignored. The breach of privacy while accessing user data is a major one. In general, politized big data has the potential to drive a lot of positive impact, but its promise and perils should be considered when building new applications. 